Perfect. Uh, okay. Thank you so much.
Uh, very excited to be here and share
some ideas with you. Um, I'm going to,
uh, say some kind of large scale
conceptual things in addition to some
data that I'm going to show you. And
it's it's hard to do that in uh, in 15
minutes. So, um, if anybody wants to
download the primary data, the software,
the, you know, all all of that stuff is
here. And then this is just a a personal
blog where I try to write about what I
think some some of these things mean.
And this is a lot of what I'll say at
the end is work done in collaboration
with Josh Bongard's lab as part of this
uh uh ICDO organization that that we
have. And what I'm going to describe
today is this notion of agential
materials and a way of interacting with
your materials that are more more around
the concepts of collaboration and and
literally a kind of social engineering
with your material because we view these
things as a collective intelligence that
we want to motivate not just uh rewire
or um or micromanage. And so one of the
great challenges in in our field which
is which is both um synthetic morphology
and uh uh biio medicine is that someday
you want to sit in front of a computer
and you want to draw the plant, animal,
biobot uh organ whatever whatever you
want with with you know no limitations
really. And uh what this thing should do
is compile that description down to a
set of stimuli that would be given to
cells to get them to build whatever you
want such as this three-headed flatworm.
And of course if we had something like
this a lot of problems in biio medicine
would go away and a lot of problems in
bioengineering would be solved. But as
we all know we don't have anything
remotely like this. We can only do this
in a very small uh if if at all in a
very small set of circumstances. And I
think that's largely because we've been
uh thinking so far about either passive
matter uh now increasingly active matter
computational materials. But in biology
I think what we're dealing with is what
I call an agential material. It's a
material that at multiple scales has
agendas and problem solving capacities
which we have not largely have not yet
um taken advantage of. And so for me the
anatomical compiler is not some sort of
3D printer. Uh it is a communications
device. It is a translator between your
goals as the engineer and the goals of
the material because I I do think that
in a cybernetic sense the material has
goals. In fact many of them. So this is
the sort of thing we're dealing with.
Now this is a pre-living organism called
a lacrimaria but you get the idea. It's
a single cell. There's no brain. There's
no nervous system. It's uh handling all
of its uh all of its needs in in
anatomical space and metabolic space and
physiological space. And from that one
cell normally uh develop all of these
kinds of amazing creatures including
these that will actually have very
significant problem solving cognitive
capacities. And what we know from
developmental biology is that this is a
slow and gradual process. There is no
specific uh magic line at which
intelligence kicks in. This is a process
of scaling competencies not a process of
magical categories. And so uh so we need
to understand this the scaling in order
to have good interactions with with a
material. In fact it turns out that even
uh below the single cell level so just
the molecular networks themselves let's
say gene regulatory networks or
molecular pathways uh already have six
different kinds of learning that they
can do. uh this is this does not require
a cell or or synapses or any of that uh
just the molecular pathways themselves
and this is a free gift from the
mathematics of of networks they can
already do habituation association
Pavlovian conditioning and we're now
taking advantage of all of that for um
experiments and drug conditioning for um
for biomedical um uh purposes and so the
material has these these capacities uh
sort of all the way from from from the
very bottom and what I think is
happening here is a kind of multiscale
competency architecture where each level
and so the here here are all the levels
of organization. Uh each level is
basically deforming the option space for
the levels below. But each level is
navigating that space. Contextsensitive
uh navigation of the option space and
these are uh uh transcriptional spaces,
physiological state spaces, anatomical
morph space and then at some point when
nerve and muscle kicked in then of
course three-dimensional space of
behavior. all of this this this the kind
of relationship is present all the way
down. And and what what each level is
doing is is deforming the option space
for its parts to ensure that their
conventional behavior is also serving
the needs of a of a higher level in a
different space that the parts don't
know anything about. And this this
enables some very interesting uh
properties in the biological material.
First uh just as an example, and we
could do hours and hours on these
examples. There are many many um cool
versions of this. Here's here's a
tadpole of the frog. And so you'll see
nostrils, mouth, uh brain here, gut.
What you'll notice is that we've
prevented the primary eyes from forming,
but we've put an eye on its tail. And uh
what we notice by building a machine
that automates the training and testing
of these guys in visual cues is that
they can see perfectly well. Um here's
here's the ectopic eye. It makes one
optic nerve. Sometimes it goes to the
spinal cord, sometimes to the gut, never
to the brain. And yet they can see and
they can learn in visual tasks. Now,
that's kind of amazing. uh why why does
this animal with a novel sensory motor
architecture not require new rounds of
mutation, selection, adaptation? No, it
works out of the box and the plasticity
for these kinds of things is is
absolutely enormous. Uh and and we can
we can really take advantage of this in
bioengineering. It's not just not just
animals. Uh plants do this too. This is
development is an incredibly reliable
process. And you might think that what
the oak genome encodes is the ability to
build this flat green thing. It does it
all the time. very um very consistently
except that along comes a non-human
bio-engineer. This this wasp and uh it
puts down some prompts that cause these
cells to build something completely
different. Okay, so here's this round
spiky red and orange thing. Here's
another one. They're called galls.
There's an amazing variety of them. And
they're not made from from insect cells.
They're made from plant cells. And
they're not built the way that wasps
build their nests, which is basically a
3D printing approach where it goes
around and sort builds it piece by
piece. It lays down uh some signals and
it basically hacks the morphagenetic
competency of these plants, which by the
way, we would have had no idea that
they're even capable of this if if if we
hadn't had this this example. And that
opens the question of what does the
latent space look like? What else are
they capable of building? Now, in order
to find out what they're capable of
building, we are going to have to
ratchet up our own intelligence. And you
can see there's a there's a cool um uh
relationship between the sophistication
of the hacker and the complexity of what
it actually builds. So bacteria
basically induce galls that are
featureless lumps. Fungi kind of do the
same. Now nematodes and and mites kind
of make something that has a shape but
by the time you get to insects you get
this this kind of beautiful structure.
Right? So uh basically there's a
birectional relationship between how
smart we are as hackers and what we can
get the material to do. And as I pointed
out, um, we as humans because of our own
evolutionary history are obsessed with
three-dimensional space. We are okay at
recognizing intelligence of medium-sized
objects moving at medium speeds through
the three-dimensional space that we're
used to. But biology has been navigating
all these other spaces and in particular
doing the sensing decision-m uh
actuation loop in all kinds of uh other
spaces. you know highdimensional weird
spaces that are hard for us to visualize
like transcriptional space um anatomical
morphus space which is what we study
physiological state space and so on. So
so embodiment is really not just about
motility in threedimensional space when
we build these things that navigate
spaces in ways that we would like them
to do. We have to think beyond just
motion in threedimensional space. All of
these other spaces and and probably many
that we can't even visualize are are
fair game for this. Now, um this is
another thing I could talk for hours
about, but I'm just going to show you
one slide. Um in our group, we've been
studying one particular kind of
cognitive glue that binds individual
cells with their agendas in in in
transcriptional space and physiological
space and so on into largecale
multisellular constructs that navigate
anatomical space. And one kind, and
there are several kinds at least, but
one kind of cognitive glue, much like in
the brain that does exactly the same
thing for your neurons, making you more
than just the pile of neurons, is
bioelectricity. And so we have now ways
to read and write electrical states in
into non-neural tissue. Um, we've we've
developed these these techniques over
the last 20 years to basically take all
of the tools of cognitive neuroscience
and bring them into understanding the
decision-making, the memories, the uh
the problem solving capacities of of of
non-neural cells in navigating the space
of possible shapes. And this because now
we understand what the cognitive glue
is, we can start to use that as an
interface to communicate new goals to uh
to the tissue. And so here for example
um and we could do this with drugs with
optogenetics there are many ways to do
it but um by injecting specific um mRNAs
guided by a computational model that I
don't have time to show you we can we
can introduce specific bioelectric
patterns uh into the early embryo and
convey a very highlevel messages. So so
here we've in this case we've uh put in
a message that says uh build an eye and
so here you go. This is it makes a
complete eye with lens right and optic
nerve all that stuff. Now, we don't know
how to micromanage the building of an
eye. It's a very complex organ. Lots of
genes expressed, lots of cell cell
types, and in a very stereotypical
order. We have no idea how to
micromanage any of that. Luckily, we
don't need to. Like with any good
cognitive system, there are simple
stimuli that result in very complex
behaviors that the system knows how to
do that you don't have to worry about.
And the material has some really cool uh
properties. For example, this is a
cross-section taken through a lens
sitting in the tail somewhere. What
you'll notice is the blue cells are the
ones we injected. All this other stuff
that participates, we never touched it.
This is secondary instruction. We told
these cells, you should build an eye and
they intrinsically uh know that there's
not enough of them to do it. And so they
recruit their neighbors. So they
propagate their abnormal bioelectrical
state to their neighbors. And then the
whole thing uh uh makes a decision to
build a nice coherent lens. we don't
have to hit every cell. So these are the
and we didn't have to teach it to do
that. It already does that. So these are
the kind of competencies of of this
material top- down control uh a modular
uh communication where we can talk about
an organ not genes not you know cells of
individual uh type and so on. We can
talk about whole organs and cracking
this bioelectric code is is the main um
uh or or or one of the main uh efforts
in our lab as to how we're going to
really maximize the our ability to to to
communicate with this with this
material. And so um and so the last few
things I just want to show you have have
to do with uh synthetic um kinds of
kinds of uh living constructs that don't
have the benefit of eons of evolution
where we can say well it makes an eye
because of course it evolved a um a high
level subruine call that that causes
eyes to form because that's what the
evolutionary history gave. What happens
with beings that have no specific
history of selection for this form
factor? So this um I'm sure um Josh has
already shown you some of this. This is
basically epithelial cells taken from a
frog embryo. Uh and when you when you
take them away, so so we don't change we
we don't edit the DNA. We don't put in
synthetic biology circuits. There are no
scaffolds. There are no drugs. Uh no no
nanom materials. Um all that we do is we
engineer by subtraction. Meaning that
these cells normally are going to be
bullied by these other cells and forced
into being a boring two-dimensional uh
outer cover for the the tadpole that
keeps the bacteria out. But if you
subtract this influence away and you ask
what do they in what what do these cells
intrinsically want to do? Then you see
something interesting. They don't just
crawl away from each other. They don't
um uh you know die or form a monollayer.
They they self assemble. And you can see
actually they're um here's a group. Each
one of these circles is a single cell.
So here's this tiny little thing. It it
doesn't hurt that it looks like a little
little horse or something. It it makes
its way over here. It's moving around in
a very interesting way that we still
don't understand what the how it moves.
There's a little calcium flash as it
interacts with this with this big one.
And um and these these are so these are
zenobots and uh they have some amazing
behaviors. They've repurposed their
psyia to move through the the the fluid.
You can see that here. They can go in
circles. They can patrol back and forth
like this. You can make weird shapes out
of them like this like this donut thing.
They have collective behaviors that
we're still studying. Here's um here's a
Zenobot uh navigating a maze. Um we you
know we have no idea. It's it's
self-powered. We don't need to actuate
it at all. We have no idea what um what
guides at this point. We're studying all
that. But the decision-making, you know,
why it turns around at this particular
spot. There's no liquid flow here. There
are no gradients. There's no food. It
takes this corner without having to bump
into the opposite wall and then at some
point it spontaneously turns around. So
all all of these kinds of things are um
completely spontaneous. We're not pacing
it or controlling it. Now, one of the
one of the um studies that we've made of
it is um what are the uh transcriptional
uh what what what does the transcriptto
look like of a of a creature that has a
novel lifestyle that you know has not
been selected for? And it turns out that
it has hundreds of genes that are
expressed very differently than uh than
these than these same cells back in the
embryo. And I'll just show you one
example of what it what it does as it
dips into the genome to pick out novel
um things that are that are there for
this lifestyle. there there's a there's
a whole cluster of genes that actually
is associated with sensory perception of
sound and we thought that's kind of
amazing. Uh is it possible that that
they can actually that these things
could actually hear or respond to sound
and so what we did was this experiment
we put um a speaker under this and again
this is just you know brand new kinds of
things but um it turns out that um they
absolutely uh do change their behavior
uh when when you provide uh these kinds
of sound stimuli. So, you know, these
little tight circles, as soon as you
turn on the the the sound, they they
they do this and then eventually they go
when you stop, they go back to this. Not
exactly the same. So, maybe there's a
little bit of residual memory, but we're
trying to figure that out. So, all of
these things we're now doing behavioral
experiments to ask what do they
remember? What can they learn? What are
their preferences? And the last thing
that I'll just show you is that this is
not some weird fluke of of frog
development. This this little thing
which looks like um we got it off the
bottom of a pond somewhere is actually
uh if you were to sequence it it's it's
homo sapiens 100% wild type homo
sapiens. These are anthrobots made of
human tracheal epithelial cells. Uh and
they do some they also do some
interesting things. If you plate a bunch
of human neurons and you put a big
scratch through it, they will uh
traverse that scratch. But then they'll
pick a spot and sit down and they sort
of form the superbot cluster. And what
you see is that what they're actually
doing is healing uh healing the gap.
They they can actually induce repair. If
you lift them up 4 days later, this is
what it looks like. They can actually
induce repair across this gap. So, who
would have known that that your
trachithelial cells have the ability to
form this autonomous little biobot um
run around and uh you know, and heal
wounds. They have thousands about 9,000
genes differently expressed than the
than the tissue of origin. Uh tons of
amazing things here that that we're
still mining. uh four discrete behaviors
that you could build a behavioral um
ethoggram of. Um and we're also working
on uh trying to understand what their um
protocognitive properties um look like.
And so the very last thing that I'll
that I'll just say and this is you know
kind of the weirdest the weirdest part
of this is that we have to start
thinking I if it wasn't a history of
selection which which people take to to
to explain this this path this kind of
thing you know what what are these
zenobots turning into if it if it wasn't
direct engineering which we didn't do we
all we did was liberate the cells we
didn't program them in any way um and if
it wasn't selection where does other
information come from and I just want to
uh pitch this this this idea that you
know we do have a precedent for
information that does not come from the
physical world. In other words, uh this
is a this is a mathematical object
called a plot of this little function.
And if you want to ask why does it have
the particular shape that it has, the
answer is not anything about its
evolutionary history. It's not anything
about any facts of physics. It comes
from other laws of mathematics that many
plist mathematicians are studying as a
structured ordered set of of patterns.
this you know this this map of
mathematics and so and so I just want to
want to argue and again this is this
would take hours to do this properly but
just just to point out that I think we
need to go a lot far beyond emergence as
as an answer to the question of where do
these properties come from and we need
to ask what are the structured patterns
that um that we are releasing here and
and I view these synthetic beings as
vehicles for exploring this this latent
space and I and I think this is this is
the research program and so as We make
cyborgs and hybrots and all these kinds
of things. Yeah, they're combinations of
evolved material, engineered material,
sometimes software, but also uh patterns
from the space of mathematical patterns
that uh are not to be found specifically
among the laws of physics. And I think
just by itself emergence is is not going
to do the trick. we really need to um uh
to develop uh tools to understand what
to to map out that space and map out the
uh uh the interactions between the
physical interfaces that we make and the
patterns that we see. And so this this
now the the ability to use all of these
amazing features of the living material
is part of the field of diverse
intelligence where and and we are trying
to use some AI tools to communicate
across all the different levels. So
that's it. I'm going to stop here and
just um summarize what what I've tried
to say is that in biology there's this
multiscale competency architecture of
nested problem solvers. We as evolution
can uh can exploit this material via
prompts and training not just uh
rewiring or micromanagement. Tools are
coming online to communicate with these
systems uh via bielectrics and of course
other modalities lots of applications.
And finally I think that we really need
to pay a lot of attention to uh what you
might call the intrinsic motivation of
the system. not not uh just uh uh uh
programming, not just reinforcement
learning, but actually uh understand
what it is that that these things uh can
do aside from what we've made them do.
And so I'll just stop here and thank the
people who did the work. So our posttos,
some some amazing postocs and grad
students that did the work that I showed
you today. Lots of lots of collaborators
uh that that work with us. always, you
know, thank the funders and and of
course mo most of all to the model
systems both biological and synthetic
and every combination that that has t
taught us all of these things. So I'll
stop here. Thank you.
Any questions from the audience?
Yes.
Hello. It's inspiring MB student from
Sheffle.
Hi.
So I want to ask you about your
insights. If we using Kaufman principles
like dealing with the biological cells
as reaching steady state in a
non-equilibrium environment or use it
our dealing models the biological cells
in quantum undeterministic
rules. This will help us to predict what
it behavior and making it we we predict
it so we can know what it will do. So we
can control it by controlling its
behavior without controlling it really.
So I want to hear your insight about
this. Thank you.
Yeah. Um my my my my current uh
framework for for all of this stuff is
that I think the most uh powerful uh
advances in predicting their behavior in
manipulating their behavior and so on
are not going to come from
thermodynamics or from quantum biology.
Although I'm sure those things have
important things to tell us. I I I think
the the biggest uh impact on this is
going to come from behavioral uh
behavioral and cognitive neuroscience
because I think that those things those
those disciplines are not about neurons
at all. They're about much more
fundamental um aspects of different
modalities that function as a cognitive
glue that that basically scale the the
competencies of subunits and project
them into novel problem spaces. And
there is a a wealth of information there
that have so far approaches both both
experimental and uh and conceptual that
have so far been deployed around brains
and development but all of this stuff
works in in many other contexts. So, so
not just the learning in molecular
networks, but you know use of
hallucinogens of anesthetics of um
serotonin modulators to to to literally
change the priors, the decision- making,
the the you know the the certainty, all
these kinds of things that you normally
think of when dealing with animals. All
this stuff works as far as I can tell
all the way down. And so to to me um all
of this that that is where the biggest
advances are are going to go is from the
field of diverse intelligence applied to
bioengineering. And there's a there's a
massive opportunity there because
actually that field is very focused on
natural animals of all kinds. You know
they think about bacteria and and and
you know and unicellular organisms and
whales and things but actually um at
those meetings there have been very few
bioengineers and so the opportunity for
for a cross fertilization of this of
these field and roboticists the
opportunity are are massive. I think
other questions ret
as always.
Good to see you.
Um curious about the sound, how you
chose that. Is it just like a really
nice precise non-invasive way to do
mechano transduction or was there
another reason that sort of motivated
that choice?
Um okay. So, so the question of sound to
begin with was simply because we did the
transcrytoics and we found this cluster
of hearing genes and we thought okay
maybe this thing is trying to maybe this
is the bigger picture here. I think is
the idea that that these novel systems
in with a novel lifestyle are problem
solving in the sense that they and I
have other examples we could talk about
that dip into their genome to to start
to transcribe things that are going to
be useful in this lifestyle. Right? And
and so this this sort of primed us when
we saw the hearing. We said, "Okay,
let's let's just test it." Now, uh in
terms of what the sound what the sound
is, the only thing we've published so
far is one single wavelength is a sine
wave and that's it, right? One one
frequency and it's a sine wave. We are
currently testing everything from a full
frequency sweep to we play different
kinds of music that we let them talk to
each other because uh you know there's a
million things. And so I we the juryy's
very much still open on what they're
doing with that information while I'm
sure the u molecular view of this thing
is some sort of mechano transaction.
That's probably how they're hearing. I
mean they're using um you know they're
using psyia the same way that that we do
and so on. So I'm sure at the at the
lowest level that is probably exactly
what they're doing. But at a higher
level what I want to understand is e
ecologically why are they why why is
this now important? Why are they
transcribing these genes? And um on the
computation side, you know, I I I I want
to know how it is what what is the um
the internal causal architecture that
allows that system to go from this is
this is my environment to now this is
what I want to transcribe. Okay, how is
it? And and and the examples that the
other examples that we've had in our lab
have to do with uh for example flatworms
identifying just a halfozen genes out of
a out of a genome of tens of thousands
when it's when that that will allow it
to overcome a novel toxin that it's
never seen before. So, so, so we have
these experiments where we hit them with
something that's never been around
during evolution. Within, you know,
within a week they find uh they find the
solution. And so, how do they find it?
Because this, I think, has massive
biomedical implications. So I think all
of this has the two layers right there's
the biohysical layer where it's like
yeah it's mechano transduction no doubt
but the bigger question is what
information is it processing how and why
hi um I'm wondering if you have any
thoughts you know we're in this field
especially with the muscle tissue we're
in In a sense, we're trying to replicate
the form and function of an organ that
exists in a, you know, as a part of an
organism.
Yep.
But at the same time, we are exposing it
to conditions and an environment where I
would guess, you know, especially after
learning about your work, like the cells
are in some way trying to do this
problem solving on their own. Um, and so
I'm wondering like from uh in in terms
of us trying to advance the function of
the tissues, do you have any thoughts
about like the way we should be
approaching treating these these
cellular collectives? Should we just go
off should we try to copy invivo
environments or you know explore uh
other alternatives anyway?
Yeah. Um so so the two the two
approaches to this that that I've I've
written about and also that we are
trying to follow in our lab are first of
all um training so I think it would be
and and and you know I I'm you guys have
a lot more expertise in actually setting
up the muscle side of this than I do but
but but but rewards and punishments and
training of of cells and tissues for
specific outcomes. So, so building
closed loop we've we're this is this is
one thing we're doing now not with
muscle but for other reasons is is build
a closed loop device that continuously
rewards for desirable behavior and
exploiting the learning capacity to
basically train not not physically force
but to train uh the cells to do what you
want them to do. So that's that's the
first thing. The second thing which
which you can do with that same kind of
platform is um instrumental learning. In
other words uh you can ask the cells
what they want to do by giving them
control over the environment. In other
words, you set up a closed loop system
where different actions lead to
different outcomes. And in effect, you
get to ask the cells, you let you let
them uh find the kinds of behaviors that
give them the stimuli and the you know
the outcomes that that are meaningful to
them. And I think by doing that, we
learn more about the system and then and
then we can become much better at at
motivating them. And I I I always think
back to you know, humans have been
training dogs and horses thousands of
years before we knew any neuroscience.
And we had no idea about mechanisms. But
but what we did understand is that they
have this amazing interface that if we
if we understand the currency of of uh
the way that they learn, right? So
rewards and punishments and and and
behavior shaping paradigms and all this
kind of stuff, then then you be then
then you can get some amazing outcomes
even even if you're not micromanaging
the you know the synaptic chemistry. And
I have a feeling that that's what we're
going to need to do here is to get a
much better idea of what what what do
the cells actually want to do? What do
they value as as as rewards and and and
negative reinforcement? And how can we
do behavior shaping to to get them to do